Fabricate.js 3.0.0
2024-01-07 17:28
JavaScript,TypeScript,Releases
---

A new version of [fabricate.js](https://github.com/C-D-Lewis/fabricate.js) is
available (has been for some weeks, it's just taken me a bit of a while to get
around to writing about it). It's the second major release, with some breaking
changes, but also some benefits that should make creating simple web apps easier
than before, in line with the core goal of the library. Let's go though them!

## App builder function

When starting an app, it is now required to provide a builder function to
<code>fabricate.app()</code> instead of a component - this helps prevent cases
where apps try to do something on creation before the rest of the app is ready
to make and receive state updates.

```js
const App = () => fabricate('Column')
  .setChildren([
    fabricate('Text').setText('Hello world!'),
  ]);

fabricate.app(App);
```

## Support for providing a theme

I often find myself importing a Theme from another file quite often when setting
component styles. I figured it would be easier to have access to the theme at
that time and not require importing it, potentially also avoiding some
circular dependency problems.

Make sure the theme has the required shape with a palette and styles:

```js
const theme = {
  palette: {
    primary: 'green',
    secondary: 'lightgrey',
  },
  styles: {
    cardBorder: 'solid 2px lightgrey',
    dropShadow: '2px 2px 3px 1px #0009',
  },
};

const options = {
  logStateUpdates: true,
  theme,
};

fabricate.app(App, {}, options);
```

Then use it when setting styles:

```js
const Button = () => fabricate('Button')
  .setStyles(({ palette, styles }) => ({
    border: styles.cardBorder,
    backgroundColor: palette.secondary,
  }));
```

## Set narrow styles

Quite often I'd write styles using the <code>isNarrow()</code> helper in one set
of styles. I think it's easier and more obvious the new way:

```js
const Header = () => fabricate('Text')
  .setStyles({ fontSize: '1.2rem' })
  .setNarrowStyles({ fontSize: '1rem' });
```

## Removing onCreate

I seemed quite often to be using the same code for <code>onCreate</code> as
<code>onUpdate</code> for setting layouts based on state data. To reduce
repetition they have been combined, and apps should use the new built-in key
<code>fabricate:created</code> key:

```js
const View = () => fabricate('Text')
  .onUpdate((el, state, keys) => {
    // This element created
    if (keys.includes('fabricate:created')) {
      el.setText('Creation complete');
      return;
    }

    // An update
  });
```

I'm still a bit undecided in whether this solves the problem, so it may be
reverted in the future.

## Removing the strict option

The `strict` option existed before to allow opt-in checking of state keys
being updated and a few other things which after some time seem like all-round
good ideas. So, I removed it and the strict settings are always enforced. For
example, accidentally updating unexpected state will throw an error:

```js
const initialState = {
  counter: 0,
};

const App = () => fabricate('Button')
  .onClick(() => {
    // Error: 'clicks' is not some expected state
    fabricate.update({ clicks: 1 });
  })

fabricate.app(App, initialState);
```

In cases where state keys are not known ahead of time, this can be bypassed with
<code>buildKey()</code>.

This also means that a list of state keys to watch for <code>onUpdate</code> is
now mandatory, since elements that do things on every state update are very rare
and can be an easy way to degrade performance invisibly.

## Text size

The default font size for the built-in <code>Text</code> is now just 1
<code>rem</code> unit.

## Performance for lots of children

When adding a very large number of child elements (50) in cases like loading
items from an API, they will be added in groups of 50 using `setTimeout`. This
seems to greatly improve responsiveness in such cases, and it's rare for such
a number to be on screen at once.

Similarly, when using `.empty()` items, a warning is logged when there are more
than 50 - however, I wasn't easily able to find an equivalent solution here as
removing groups from the top would look like rapid scrolling, and from the
bottom would appear as no change until the top items are reached...

## Validating options

For those not using the TypeScript types, the options passed to
<code>app()</code> are now manually validated, handling cases where I forget
what some options are called or other mistakes that are possible.

## Conclusion

That's it! As always, it's easier to make improvements to this library after
gaining more hours of experience with the challenges and requirements discovered
while using it to implement various apps and websites. Long may it continue!
